Record #1 of 3
ID: CD010373
AU: Mei F
AU: Hu K
AU: Zhao B
AU: Gao Q
AU: Chen F
AU: Zhao L
AU: Wu M
AU: Feng L
AU: Wang Z
AU: Yang J
AU: et al.
TI: Retroperitoneal versus transperitoneal approach for elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
SO: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
YR: 2021
NO: 6
PB: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
SN: 1465-1858
KY: Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal [*surgery]; Bias; Blood Loss, Surgical [statistics & numerical data]; Elective Surgical Procedures [adverse effects, *methods, mortality]; Hematoma [epidemiology]; Humans; Length of Stay; Operative Time; Pain, Postoperative [epidemiology]; Peritoneum; Postoperative Complications [epidemiology]; Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic; Retroperitoneal Space
CC: [Vascular]
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010373.pub3
AB: Abstract - Background There has been extensive debate in the surgical literature regarding the optimum surgical access approach to the infrarenal abdominal aorta during an operation to repair an abdominal aortic aneurysm. The published trials comparing retroperitoneal (RP) and transperitoneal (TP) aortic surgery show conflicting results. This is an update of the review first published in 2016. Objectives To assess the effectiveness and safety of the retroperitoneal versus transperitoneal approach for elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair on mortality, complications, hospital stay and blood loss. Search methods The Cochrane Vascular Information Specialist searched the Cochrane Vascular Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase and CINAHL databases and the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform and the ClinicalTrials.gov trials registers to 30 November 2020. The review authors searched the Chinese Biomedical Literature Database and handsearched reference lists of relevant articles to identify additional trials. Selection criteria We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed the RP approach versus the TP approach for elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair. There were no restrictions on language or publication status. Data collection and analysis Two review authors independently extracted data from the included trials. We resolved any disagreements through discussion with a third review author. Two review authors independently assessed the risk of bias in included trials with the Cochrane risk of bias tool. For dichotomous outcomes, we calculated the odds ratio (OR) with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). For continuous data, we calculated a pooled estimate of treatment effect by calculating the mean difference (MD) and standard deviation (SD) with corresponding 95% CIs. We pooled data using a fixed‐effect model, unless we identified heterogeneity, in which case we used a random‐effects model. We used GRADE to assess the overall certainty of the evidence. We evaluated the outcomes of mortality, complications, intensive care unit (ICU) stay, hospital stay, blood loss, aortic cross‐clamp time and operating time. Main results We identified no new studies from the updated searches. After reassessment, we included one study which had previously been excluded. Five RCTs with a combined total of 152 participants are included. The overall certainty of the evidence ranged from low to very low because of the low methodological quality of the included trials (unclear random sequence generation method and allocation concealment, and no blinding of outcome assessors), small sample sizes, small number of events, high heterogeneity and inconsistency between the included trials, no power calculations and relatively short follow‐up. There was no evidence of a difference between the RP approach and the TP approach regarding mortality (odds ratio (OR) 0.32, 95% CI 0.01 to 8.25; 3 studies, 110 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). Similarly, there was no evidence of a difference in complications such as hematoma (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.13 to 6.48; 2 studies, 75 participants; very low‐certainty evidence), abdominal wall hernia (OR 10.76, 95% CI 0.55 to 211.78; 1 study, 48 participants; very low‐certainty evidence), or chronic wound pain (OR 2.20, 95% CI 0.36 to 13.34; 1 study, 48 participants; very low‐certainty evidence) between the RP and TP approaches in participants undergoing elective open AAA repair. The RP approach may reduce ICU stay (mean difference (MD) ‐19.02 hours, 95% CI ‐30.83 to ‐7.21; 3 studies, 106 participants; low‐certainty evidence); hospital stay (MD ‐3.30 days, 95% CI ‐4.85 to‐1.75; 5 studies, 152 participants; low‐certainty evidence); and blood loss (MD ‐504.87 mL, 95% CI ‐779.19 to ‐230.56; 4 studies, 129 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). There was no evidence of a difference between the RP approach and the TP approach regarding aortic cross‐clamp time (MD 0.69 min, 95% CI ‐7.23 to 8.60; 4 studies, 129 participants; very low‐certainty evidence) or operating time (MD ‐15.94 min, 95% CI ‐34.76 to 2.88; 4 studies, 129 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). Authors' conclusions Very low‐certainty evidence from five small RCTs showed no clear evidence of a difference between the RP approach and the TP approach for elective open AAA repair in terms of mortality, or for rates of complications including hematoma (very low‐certainty evidence), abdominal wall hernia (very low‐certainty evidence), or chronic wound pain (very low‐certainty evidence). However, a shorter intensive care unit (ICU) stay and shorter hospital stay was probably indicated following the RP approach compared to the TP approach (both low‐certainty evidence). A possible reduction in blood loss was also shown after the RP approach (very low‐certainty evidence). There is no clear difference between the RP approach and TP approach in aortic cross‐clamp time or operating time. Further well‐designed, large‐scale RCTs assessing the RP approach versus TP approach for elective open AAA repair are required. Plain language summary Different surgical approaches to access the infrarenal abdominal aorta during an operation to repair an abdominal aortic aneurysm Background There has been a lot of debate in the surgical literature about the best way to surgically access the infrarenal abdominal aorta during an operation to repair an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA: a ballooning of an artery (blood vessel) which occurs in the major artery in the abdomen (aorta)). Two approaches are commonly used: the retroperitoneal (RP) approach and the transperitoneal (TP) approach. Both approaches appear to have advantages and disadvantages. Many trials comparing RP and TP aortic surgery have been published, with conflicting results. The aim of this Cochrane Review is to assess the effectiveness and safety of the RP versus TP approach for planned surgical open AAA repair, taking into account mortality, complications, hospital stay and blood loss. This is an update of the review originally published in 2016. Key results We found no new studies from the updated searches. After reassessment, we included one study which had previously been excluded. Therefore, the review includes five small randomized controlled trials (RCTs), including 152 participants. The evidence in this Cochrane Review is current to 30 November 2020. There were no clear differences between RP and TP for the outcome of death. Similarly, there was no clear evidence that RP might increase complications such as hematoma (swelling of clotted blood), chronic wound pain and abdominal wall hernia compared with TP, but there were variations between the included trials. We found that RP might result in shorter hospital stay and intensive care unit (ICU) stay and less blood loss compared with TP. There were no clear differences between the two approaches for operating time and aortic cross‐clamp time (length of time that a surgical instrument, used to clamp the aorta and separate the circulation from the outflow of the heart, is used). Reliability of the evidence Four of the five included trials had methodological weaknesses ‐ such as unclear randomization methods, and no reporting of blinding of the people assessing the outcome ‐ which compromised the value of their results. In addition, the included trials only included a small number of people, few outcomes were reported, participants were followed up for a relatively short time, and there were inconsistencies between the included trials, resulting in evidence of very low to low certainty. More large‐scale RCTs of the RP approach versus the TP approach for planned surgical open AAA repair are needed.
US: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010373.pub3


Record #2 of 3
ID: CD004011
AU: Ellahi A
AU: Stewart F
AU: Kidd EA
AU: Griffiths R
AU: Fernandez R
AU: Omar MI
TI: Strategies for the removal of short‐term indwelling urethral catheters in adults
SO: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
YR: 2021
NO: 6
PB: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
SN: 1465-1858
KY: *Catheters, Indwelling [adverse effects]; Adult; Bias; Catheter-Related Infections [etiology]; Device Removal [methods, *standards]; Female; Humans; Length of Stay; Male; Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic; Time Factors; Urethra; Urinary Catheterization [*instrumentation]; Urinary Tract Infections [etiology]; Urination
CC: [Incontinence]
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004011.pub4
AB: Abstract - Background Urinary catheterisation is a common procedure, with approximately 15% to 25% of all people admitted to hospital receiving short‐term (14 days or less) indwelling urethral catheterisation at some point during their care. However, the use of urinary catheters is associated with an increased risk of developing urinary tract infection. Catheter‐associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI) is one of the most common hospital‐acquired infections. It is estimated that around 20% of hospital‐acquired bacteraemias arise from the urinary tract and are associated with mortality of around 10%. This is an update of a Cochrane Review first published in 2005 and last published in 2007. Objectives To assess the effects of strategies for removing short‐term (14 days or less) indwelling catheters in adults. Search methods We searched the Cochrane Incontinence Specialised Register, which contains trials identified from CENTRAL, MEDLINE, MEDLINE In‐Process, MEDLINE Epub Ahead of Print, CINAHL, ClinicalTrials.gov, WHO ICTRP, and handsearching of journals and conference proceedings (searched 17 March 2020), and reference lists of relevant articles. Selection criteria We included all randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi‐RCTs that evaluated the effectiveness of practices undertaken for the removal of short‐term indwelling urethral catheters in adults for any reason in any setting. Data collection and analysis Two review authors performed abstract and full‐text screening of all relevant articles. At least two review authors independently performed risk of bias assessment, data abstraction and GRADE assessment. Main results We included 99 trials involving 12,241 participants. We judged the majority of trials to be at low or unclear risk of selection and detection bias, with a high risk of performance bias. We also deemed most trials to be at low risk of attrition and reporting bias. None of the trials reported on quality of life. The majority of participants across the trials had undergone some form of surgical procedure. Thirteen trials involving 1506 participants compared the removal of short‐term indwelling urethral catheters at one time of day (early morning removal group between 6 am to 7 am) versus another (late night removal group between 10 pm to midnight). Catheter removal late at night may slightly reduce the risk of requiring recatheterisation compared with early morning (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.96; 10 RCTs, 1920 participants; low‐certainty evidence). We are uncertain if there is any difference between early morning and late night removal in the risk of developing symptomatic CAUTI (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.61 to 1.63; 1 RCT, 41 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). We are uncertain whether the time of day makes a difference to the risk of dysuria (RR 2.20; 95% CI 0.70 to 6.86; 1 RCT, 170 participants; low‐certainty evidence). Sixty‐eight trials involving 9247 participants compared shorter versus longer durations of catheterisation. Shorter durations may increase the risk of requiring recatheterisation compared with longer durations (RR 1.81, 95% CI 1.35 to 2.41; 44 trials, 5870 participants; low‐certainty evidence), but probably reduce the risk of symptomatic CAUTI (RR 0.52, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.61; 41 RCTs, 5759 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence) and may reduce the risk of dysuria (RR 0.42, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.88; 7 RCTs; 1398 participants; low‐certainty evidence). Seven trials involving 714 participants compared policies of clamping catheters versus free drainage. There may be little to no difference between clamping and free drainage in terms of the risk of requiring recatheterisation (RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.21; 5 RCTs; 569 participants; low‐certainty evidence). We are uncertain if there is any difference in the risk of symptomatic CAUTI (RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.60 to 1.63; 2 RCTs, 267 participants; very low‐certainty evidence) or dysuria (RR 0.84, 95% CI 0.46 to 1.54; 1 trial, 79 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). Three trials involving 402 participants compared the use of prophylactic alpha blockers versus no intervention or placebo. We are uncertain if prophylactic alpha blockers before catheter removal has any effect on the risk of requiring recatheterisation (RR 1.18, 95% CI 0.58 to 2.42; 2 RCTs, 184 participants; very low‐certainty evidence) or risk of symptomatic CAUTI (RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.01 to 4.06; 1 trial, 94 participants; very low‐certainty evidence). None of the included trials investigating prophylactic alpha blockers reported the number of participants with dysuria. Authors' conclusions There is some evidence to suggest the removal of indwelling urethral catheters late at night rather than early in the morning may reduce the number of people who require recatheterisation. It appears that catheter removal after shorter compared to longer durations probably reduces the risk of symptomatic CAUTI and may reduce the risk of dysuria. However, it may lead to more people requiring recatheterisation. The other evidence relating to the risk of symptomatic CAUTI and dysuria is too uncertain to allow us to draw any conclusions. Due to the low certainty of the majority of the evidence presented here, the results of further research are likely to change our findings and to have a further impact on clinical practice. This systematic review has highlighted the need for a standardised set of core outcomes, which should be measured and reported by all future trials comparing strategies for the removal of short‐term urinary catheters. Future trials should also study the effects of short‐term indwelling urethral catheter removal on non‐surgical patients. Plain language summary What are the best strategies for removing drainage tubes (urinary catheters) from the urinary bladder after 14 days or less? Key messages • Removing drainage tubes late at night instead of early in the morning might reduce the number of people who need to have the drainage tube reinserted. • Removing drainage tubes sooner rather than later probably reduces the risk of infection caused by the drainage tube and painful urination. However, it may lead to more people needing to have the tube reinserted. • We need future studies to research the effects of drainage tube removal for people who did not have surgery. What are urinary catheters? Urinary catheters are flexible, hollow tubes that are used to empty the urinary bladder and collect urine in a bag. They are often used for short periods of time for people who cannot pass urine themselves, for example during or after surgery, or when healthcare staff need to measure someone’s urine. One harmful effect of catheters is the risk of developing urinary tract infections (UTIs). If catheters are removed quickly, the risk of infection is reduced, but if they are removed too soon, they may need to be reinserted. What did we want to find out? We wanted to investigate the effects of different strategies on the risk of: • needing to have the catheter reinserted; • developing a urinary tract infection (UTI); • experiencing pain when urinating. What did we do? We searched for studies that looked at the use of short‐term urinary catheters in adults. We defined ‘short‐term’ as 14 days or less. Studies could take place anywhere and participants could have any condition or illness. We compared and summarised the results of the studies and rated our confidence in the evidence, based on factors such as study methods and sizes. What did we find? We found 99 studies with 12,241 participants. Most participants were surgical patients and many of the studies (50) assessed women only. The studies investigated: • removing the catheter early in the morning compared with late at night (13 studies); • retaining the catheter for shorter or longer times (68 studies); • clamping catheters or allowing them to drain freely (7 studies); and • giving men treatment (alpha blockers) to relax the prostate compared to no treatment before removing the catheter (3 studies). The prostate is a small gland located between the penis and the bladder. Early‐morning compared to late‐night removal Late‐night catheter removal might reduce the risk of needing to have the catheter reinserted compared with early‐morning removal. We are uncertain if there is any difference between early‐morning and late‐night removal for developing UTI or painful urination. Shorter compared to longer use of catheters People who have their catheters removed after a shorter length of time are probably less likely to develop UTIs and may be less likely to experience painful urination compared with those who have their catheters for longer. However, we also found that people may be more likely to need the catheter reinserting if they have the catheter for a shorter compared with a longer time. Clamping There may be little to no difference between clamping and free drainage on the risk of needing the catheter to be reinserted. We are uncertain if there is any difference in the risk of UTIs or painful urination. Treatment to relax the prostate We are uncertain whether giving alpha‐blockers before the catheter is removed has any effect on the need to have catheters reinserted or the risk of developing UTIs. There was no evidence about the risk of experiencing painful urination. What are the limitations of the evidence? Many of the included trials had design flaws, did not recruit enough people, or did not report enough information about their results. This means our confidence in the evidence is limited. How up‐to‐date is this evidence? The evidence is current up to 17 March 2020.
US: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004011.pub4


Record #3 of 3
ID: CD008726
AU: Williams MJ
AU: Carvalho Ribeiro do Valle C
AU: Gyte GML
TI: Different classes of antibiotics given to women routinely for preventing infection at caesarean section
SO: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
YR: 2021
NO: 3
PB: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
SN: 1465-1858
KY: Anti-Bacterial Agents [adverse effects, classification, *therapeutic use]; Antibiotic Prophylaxis [methods]; Bacterial Infections [*prevention & control]; Cephalosporins [adverse effects, *therapeutic use]; Cesarean Section [*adverse effects]; Female; Humans; Infant, Newborn; Penicillins [adverse effects, *therapeutic use]; Postoperative Complications [*prevention & control]; Pregnancy; Puerperal Infection [prevention & control]; Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic; beta-Lactamase Inhibitors [therapeutic use]
CC: [Pregnancy and Childbirth]
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008726.pub3
AB: Abstract - Background Caesarean section increases the risk of postpartum infection for women and prophylactic antibiotics have been shown to reduce the incidence; however, there are adverse effects. It is important to identify the most effective class of antibiotics to use and those with the least adverse effects.  Objectives To determine, from the best available evidence, the balance of benefits and harms between different classes of antibiotic given prophylactically to women undergoing caesarean section, considering their effectiveness in reducing infectious complications for women and adverse effects on both mother and infant. Search methods For this 2020 update, we searched Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth’s Trials Register,  ClinicalTrials.gov , the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform ( ICTRP ) (2 December 2019), and reference lists of retrieved studies. Selection criteria We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing different classes of prophylactic antibiotics given to women undergoing caesarean section.  RCTs published in abstract form were also included. We excluded trials that compared drugs with placebo or drugs within a specific class; these are assessed in other Cochrane Reviews. We excluded quasi‐RCTs and cross‐over trials. Cluster‐RCTs were eligible for inclusion but none were identified. Data collection and analysis Two review authors independently assessed the studies for inclusion, assessed risk of bias and carried out data extraction. We assessed the certainty of the evidence using the GRADE approach. Main results We included 39 studies, with 33 providing data (8073 women). Thirty‐two studies (7690 women) contributing data administered antibiotics systemically, while one study (383 women) used lavage and was analysed separately. We identified three main comparisons that addressed clinically important questions on antibiotics at caesarean section (all systemic administration), but we only found studies for one comparison, 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins   (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors'.   We found no studies for the following comparisons: 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus lincosamides' and 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus lincosamides plus aminoglycosides'. Twenty‐seven studies (22 provided data) included comparisons of cephalosporins (only) versus penicillins (only). However for this update, we only pooled data relating to different sub‐classes of penicillins and cephalosporins where they are known to have similar spectra of action against agents likely to cause infection at caesarean section. Eight trials, providing data on 1540 women, reported on our main comparison, 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors'. We found data on four other comparisons of cephalosporins (only) versus penicillins (only) using systemic administration: antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus non‐antistaphylococcal penicillins (natural and broad spectrum) (9 studies, 3093 women); minimally antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (3 rd  generation) versus non‐antistaphylococcal penicillins (natural and broad spectrum) (4 studies, 854 women); minimally antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (3 rd  generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors (2 studies, 865 women); and minimally antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (3rd generation) versus broad spectrum and antistaphylococcal penicillins (1 study, 200 women). For other comparisons of different classes of antibiotics, only a small number of trials provided data for each comparison, and in all but one case data were not pooled. For all comparisons, there was a lack of good quality data and important outcomes often included few women. Three of the studies that contributed data were undertaken with drug company funding, one was funded by the hospital, and for all other studies the funding source was not reported. Most of the studies were at unclear risk of selection bias, reporting bias and other biases, partly due to the inclusion of many older trials where trial reports did not provide sufficient methodological information. We undertook GRADE assessment on the only main comparison reported by the included studies, antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors, and the certainty ranged from low to very low, mostly due to concerns about risk of bias, wide confidence intervals (CI), and few events. In terms of the primary outcomes for our main comparison of 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (1 st  and 2 nd  generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors': only one small study reported sepsis, and there were too few events to identify clear differences between the drugs (risk ratio (RR) 2.37, 95% CI 0.10 to 56.41, 1 study, 75 women,  very low‐certainty evidence ). There may be little or no difference between these antibiotics in preventing endometritis (RR 1.10; 95% CI 0.76 to 1.60, 7 studies, 1161 women;  low‐certainty evidence ). None of the included studies reported on infant sepsis or infant oral thrush. For our secondary outcomes, we found there may be little or no difference between interventions for maternal fever (RR 1.07, 95% CI 0.65 to 1.75, 3 studies, 678 women;  low‐certainty evidence ). We are uncertain of the effects on maternal: wound infection (RR 0.78, 95% CI 0.32 to 1.90, 4 studies, 543 women), urinary tract infection (average RR 0.64, 95% CI 0.11 to 3.73, 4 studies, 496 women), composite adverse effects (RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.09 to 10.50, 2 studies, 468 women), and skin rash (RR 1.08, 95% CI 0.28 to 4.1, 3 studies, 591 women) (all  very low certainty evidence).  Although maternal allergic reactions were reported by two studies, there were no events. There were no infant outcomes reported in the included studies. For the other comparisons, the results for most outcomes had wide CIs, few studies and few women included. None of the included trials reported on longer‐term maternal outcomes, or on any infant outcomes. Authors' conclusions Based on the best currently available evidence, 'antistaphylococcal cephalosporins' and 'broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors' may have similar efficacy at caesarean section when considering immediate postoperative infection, although we did not have clear evidence for several important outcomes. Most trials administered antibiotics at or after cord clamping, or post‐operatively, so results may have limited applicability to current practice which generally favours administration prior to skin incision. We have no data on any infant outcomes, nor on late infections (up to 30 days) in the mother; these are important gaps in the evidence that warrant further research. Antimicrobial resistance is very important but more appropriately investigated by other trial designs. Plain language summary Comparing different types of antibiotics given routinely to women at caesarean section to reduce infections What is the issue? We wanted to find out if giving specific types of antibiotics routinely at caesarean sections reduced the number of women and babies with infections, when compared with other types of antibiotics. We also looked to see if there were differences in adverse effects. The main types of antibiotics we considered were ones which target infections most commonly seen after giving birth, so we looked mainly at cephalosporins versus penicillins. We collected and analysed all relevant studies (randomised controlled trials) to answer this question (date of latest search 2 December 2019). Why is this important? Women undergoing caesarean section have an increased likelihood of infection compared with women giving birth vaginally. These infections can come from the urine, the surgical incision, or occur in the lining of the womb (endometritis). Infections can be serious, causing, for example, an abscess in the pelvis or infection in the blood. Very occasionally they can lead to a mother's death, particularly in low‐resource settings. Good surgical techniques are important to reduce infection, along with the use of skin antiseptics and giving antibiotics before the initiation of the caesarean section. Antibiotics can, however, cause adverse effects in the mother, such as nausea, vomiting, skin rash and in some rare cases allergic reactions. The mother and the baby can develop thrush (candida). Antibiotics given to women around the time of giving birth can also change the baby's gut flora and may interfere with the baby's developing immune system. What evidence did we find? We included 39 studies, of which 33 studies involving 8073 women and their babies provided data. The quality of the individual studies was generally unclear, which led to overall low or very low certainty of the evidence. Three of the 33 studies were undertaken with drug company funding. Most of the studies administered antibiotics at or after cord clamping, although practice now often gives antibiotics before skin incision. Eight studies with data on 1540 women reported on antistaphylococcal cephalosporins (first and second generation) versus broad spectrum penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors. We found that these antibiotics may be as effective as each other in reducing endometritis and maternal fever. We were uncertain which antibiotic performed better for wound infection, urinary tract infection, and maternal adverse effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and skin rash. We did not find any evidence on longer‐term outcomes for mothers once they left hospital, or on any outcomes for babies. Only one small study (75 women) reported on blood infection (sepsis) in mothers, with too few events to identify any clear differences between the antibiotics. We identified no studies with evidence on antistaphylococcal cephalosporins versus lincosamides, nor antistaphylococcal cephalosporins versus lincosamides plus aminoglycosides. The other studies looked at a very large number of different comparisons with insufficient data to come to any firm conclusions about specific comparisons. What does this mean? At caesarean sections, antistaphylococcal cephalosporins and penicillins plus betalactamase inhibitors may be similarly effective at preventing infections for the mother, although we did not find clear evidence for many important outcomes. In particular, we found no evidence describing the effects of these antibiotics on babies, nor any longer‐term effects on women and children. This is particularly concerning for the studies giving the antibiotics prior to the surgical incision, as these antibiotics may reach the baby. For the other comparisons included in this review, data were sparse. Many studies were old and lacked information on study design and important outcomes, often including small numbers of women and few events. Research on drug‐resistant antibiotics needs to be considered as well.
US: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008726.pub3


